IN'l‘RODUC'l‘ION

C. Suhjmzclz'r‘e.

39 [51]. The Hypothetical Subjunctive‚ with condition not
formally expressed, or Potential subjunctive is used ε nec ideo ad-
sequare, vi 8, 9; non omiserim, vi 20, 3 ; scias, xi 18, 5.

40 [5 3]. The subjunctive follows ‘quamquam ’‚ even though ex-
pressing a fact: quamquam mater . . . transierit, vi 51, 13 quam·
quammulta simul offunderentur‚ xi 20, 1 ; so, t00‚ quamvis ε quamvis
bellum negavisset, xi 20, 3; also donee, even where the notion of
purpose or expectation is not implied: donec Carenem . . . globus
circumveniret, xii 44, 4.

41 [ 52]. The subjunctive is frequently used in subordinate clauses,
of cases frequently occurring : after nisi, v 11, 2 ; si, vi 1, 53 30, 1 ;
quantum, vi 19, 53 qui, vi 8, 4; quoties, vi 10, 33 21, 1 ; xii 47, 3.
The pluperfect indicative, preferred in such cases by Cicero and
Caesar, is seen in vi 24, 2.

V. PARricIPLEs.

Cf. also ξ 21.

42 [54]. The ‘aoristic’ use of the present participle should be
noticed

(a) in abl. abs. : praemonente Narcisso pauca verba fecit, xi 35, 3 ;
so, hortante, vi 29, 73 accusante, vi 18, 23

(b) in nom.: Quadratus cognoscens proditum Mithridaten, xii
48> Ῑ 3

(c) as equivalent to a relative clause with a past tense: gloriam
trucidantium Crassum, ii 2, 4.

43 [54]. Participles are used in the place of subordinate clauses:

(a) causal : adnectebatur crimini Vibia . . . ut casus prioris
impatiens, xii 52, 1 3 tamquam passus, xi 36, 53

(b) final: auxiliis . . . contractis tamquam reciperaturus Armeniam,
xii 49, 23

(c) indirect statement z subdito rumore tamquam Mesopotamiam
invasurus, vi 36, 1.

44 [55]. A participial construction is used, as in Livy, giving the
sense of an abstract noun followed by a genitive : et non permissa
provincia dignationem addiderat, vi 27, 23 see also vi 35, 5.

XX

